--- PAGE 1 ---
EEG-based Investigation of the Impact of Classroom Design on Cognitive Performance of
Students
Jesus G. Cruz-Garza1, Michael Darfler1, James D. Rounds2, Elita Gao1, Saleh Kalantari*1
1 Cornell University, Department of Design and Environmental Analysis
2 Cornell University, Department of Human Development
*Corresponding author: Saleh Kalantari <sk3268@cornell.edu>
Abstract
This study investigated the neural dynamics associated with short-term exposure to different virtual
classroom designs with different window placement and room dimension. Participants engaged in five
brief cognitive tasks in each design condition including the Stroop Test, the Digit Span Test, the Benton
Test, a Visual Memory Test, and an Arithmetic Test. Performance on the cognitive tests and
Electroencephalogram (EEG) data were analyzed by contrasting various classroom design conditions. The
cognitive-test-performance results showed no significant differences related to the architectural design
features studied. We computed frequency band-power and connectivity EEG features to identify neural
patterns associated to environmental conditions. A leave-one-out machine-learning classification scheme
was implemented to assess the robustness of the EEG features, with the classification accuracy evaluation
of the trained model repeatedly performed against an unseen participant’s data. The classification results
located consistent differences in the EEG features across participants in the different classroom design
conditions, with a predictive power (test-set accuracy: 51.5%-61.3%) that was significantly higher
compared to a baseline classification learning outcome using scrambled data. These findings were most
robust during the Visual Memory Test, and were not found during the Stroop Test and the Arithmetic
Test. The most discriminative EEG features were observed in bilateral occipital, parietal, and frontal
regions in the theta (4-8 Hz) and alpha (8-12 Hz) frequency bands. Connectivity analysis reinforced these
findings by showing that there were changes in the transfer of information from centro-parietal to frontal
electrodes in the different classroom conditions. While the implications of these findings for student
learning are yet to be determined, this study provides rigorous evidence that brain activity features during
cognitive tasks are affected by the design elements of window placement and room dimensions. The
ongoing development of this EEG-based approach has the potential to strengthen evidence-based design
through the use of solid neurophysiological evidence.
Keywords: Cognitive performance; Classroom design; Virtual reality; EEG

--- PAGE 2 ---
2
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Overview and research objectives
The indoor environmental quality of classrooms has been linked to students' physical and mental health
and learning outcomes. This includes factors such as the room’s lighting, color-scheme, maintenance
level, noise level (Klatte et al., 2010), temperature (Mendell & Heath, 2005; Wargocki & Wyon, 2007),
furniture quality and layout (Castellucci et al., 2017), air quality (Daisey et al., 2003), and the
incorporation of connections to nature (Kidger et al., 2012; Ulrich, 2006). In addition to ambient
environment variables, the design of the physical classroom, such as seating arrangement (Wannarka &
Ruhl, 2008), seating type (Harvey & Kenyon, 2013), access to technology (Radcliffe, 2008), color
(Engelbrecht, 2003), and building quality (Maxwell & Schechtman, 2012) have been shown to impact
student attitudes, achievements, and behaviors, even when controlling for socioeconomic variables.
However, this prior literature on student health, behaviors, and outcomes has not focused as
extensively on specific measurements of cognitive performance in relation to the indoor environmental
features of classrooms. Cognitive performance refers to the fluency, efficiency, and accuracy of carrying
out cognitive tasks (Demetriou et al., 2020). Higher cognitive performance indicates more effective
reasoning, problem-solving, and decision-making skills, and has been associated with better information
recall and long-term mental acuity (Salthouse, 2005). Researchers have shown that some environmental
features, such as suboptimal thermal conditions and poor air quality, can impair cognitive performance,
most likely through an interconnected combination of physical pathways and psychological distraction
(Adam et al., 2008; Bandelow et al., 2010; Mäkinen et al., 2006; Martin et al., 2019; Morley et al., 2012;
Parker et al., 2013; Spitznagel et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2019; Zhu, Liu, & Wargocki,
2020). The data on these readily measured environmental quality factors is compelling, but much less is
known about the ways in which specific architectural features, such as room size, window locations, or
furniture layout, may impair or improve cognitive performance.
The growing movement toward evidence-based approaches in architectural design has yielded
promising results, but this is a challenging field in which to create scientifically robust studies (Cama,
2009; Edelstein & Macagno, 2012; Hamilton & Watkins, 2008). The current study’s approach is
commensurate with an incipient neurocognitive direction in the field, in which researchers seek not only
to gather solid behavioral and performance data but also to describe the underlying brain mechanisms that
mediate human responses to architectural features (Vartanian et al., 2013). In recent years several
“neuroarchitectural” studies have investigated brain responses to different architectural styles (Choo et al.,
2017), contours (Vartanian et al., 2013), height and enclosure (Vartanian et al., 2015), architectural façade
and landmark recognition (Rounds et al., 2020), interior space design (Banaei et al., 2017), lighting (Shin
et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2020), ambient conditions (Choi, et al., 2015; Guan et al., 2020; Choi, et al., 2019),
and color (Küller et al., 2009). Other researchers have taken a neural approach to examine the impact of
the built environment on human memory (Sternberg, 2010, p. 147) and comparative human responses to
built vs. natural environments (Banaei et al., 2017; Roe et al., 2013). In the context of the learning
environment, Kim et al. (2020) used EEG measurement to investigate the effect of indoor thermal
conditions on college students’ learning performance.
Due to a lack of opportunities (and the very high expense) for enacting precise architectural
changes in real-world structures, the most scientifically robust studies in this area have been carried out
by measuring participants’ neural responses while they view 2D images of architectural designs. As a
result, the existing neurological research may not fully capture the relevant brain responses associated
with experiencing an immersive three-dimensional environment (Coburn et al., 2017; Vecchiato et al.,
2015). While virtual-reality (VR) experiences are also limited in their ability to mimic embodied
engagements with architecture, they do allow for a more dynamic and immersive experience and a much

--- PAGE 3 ---
3
richer sense of presence, compared with 2D stimuli (Makransky et al., 2020). Research that uses an
immersive, three-dimensional VR approach is thus likely to capture a more accurate reflection of brain
responses to these environments compared to studying participants who are looking at two-dimensional
pictures. The use of VR in the current study allowed the researchers to precisely adjust architectural
variables in a way that would not be feasible in real-world contexts (Kalantari & Neo, 2020), for example
by adding different window placements in an otherwise identical classroom. It also allowed us to hold
constant other environmental variables that may strongly affect neural processes, such as temperature,
noise, and air quality.
In a previous study from our group (Kalantari et al, 2021), we compared EEG data taken while
participants completed cognitive tests in a real classroom vs. in an identical virtual classroom. The results
indicated that EEG frequency band-power was not significantly altered between the real-world and virtual
environments. Early results show a promising indication that today’s high-resolution, immersive VR
technologies can provide a good proxy for estimating neural responses to in-person, real-world
architectural design factors (Kalantari et al., 2020; Kalantari et al., 2019; Kjellgren & Buhrkall, 2010;
Palanica et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2018, 2020).
The current study is to the best of our knowledge the first that uses EEG data to evaluate neural
responses to precise changes in window placement and room width. We have also adopted a
comprehensive approach to analyzing this data to find robust and generalizable brain-activity features
associated with performing cognitive tasks in rooms with different architectural design factors. We
analyze a combination of the two common types of features used to represent EEG time signals (Lotte et
al., 2018): frequency band-power features (Ravindran et al., 2019; Rounds et al., 2020), and connectivity
between electrodes (Cruz-Garza, 2020) at the scalp level. The current research takes a data-driven,
bottom-up approach to EEG analysis by using feature extraction algorithms and machine learning. This
technique is a post-hoc analysis that seeks to identify the specific brain measurements that contain the
most relevant and least redundant information (i.e., what neural signals have changed the most in the
different classroom conditions). The machine-learning algorithm thus allows the researchers to find the
most relevant neural data, i.e. those neural patterns most affected by specific architectural design changes,
while minimizing the bias introduced by a priori assumptions.
1.2. Prior research on the impact of classroom windows and room dimension on cognitive performance
Received wisdom has long held that students gazing out of windows are likely to be neglecting their
studies. Recent research has challenged this assumption, suggesting that when students of many different
ages have access to window views in their classrooms they tend to exhibit both reduced stress and
increased attention to educational materials (Bagot et al., 2015; Collado & Corraliza, 2015; Faber Taylor
& Kuo, 2009; Li & Sullivan, 2016; Matsuoka, 2010). Empirical testing in this area remains limited,
particularly due to the difficulties in isolating window placement variables apart from other confounding
classroom factors. In addition to the presence or absence of a window, there is also the question of the
effects of different window locations, such as in the front of the classroom, to the side of students, and/or
above the line of sight. The variable of what kind of view can be seen from the window (natural scenery,
a parking lot, a busy street, etc.) is also likely to be an important factor. In the current study three different
window options were evaluated: (a) no window view, designated as the “neutral” condition, (b) a side
view tangential to the instruction, and (c) direct forward views located behind the instruction area. In both
of the window conditions (b and c), the same image of natural exterior scenery was used, consisting of a
view of tree-tops and clouds with no motion distractions, buildings, or other human-made elements.
Views of nature were chosen for the current study because they have been previously associated
with increased cognitive performance in dormitory, classroom, and workplace settings (Barrett et al.,
2015; Benfield et al., 2015; Chen, 2016; Tennessen & Cimprich, 1995). Other researchers have found that
views to nature can mitigate the performance-eroding effects of unpleasant environmental conditions such
as hot temperatures (Ko et al., 2020). However, the window locations, exterior view conditions, and other
environmental variables were not controlled in these prior studies. The predominant theoretical basis that

--- PAGE 4 ---
4
helps explain the beneficial effect of natural views on cognitive performance is Attention Restoration
Theory (Kaplan, 1995). This outlook holds that the ability to maintain mental focus can become fatigued
or depleted through sustained use, and that this capacity can be restored through the relaxed attention
promoted by natural environments (Kaplan, 1995, p. 70).
As with other architectural design variables, empirical research on how room dimensions affect
student performance has proven difficult to quantify due to the unique and complex construction of
different classrooms. Most of the work in this area is several decades old and is based on less than robust
methodologies. For example, Moore et al. (1996) speculated that ceiling heights of less than eight feet
would probably lead to more subdued and focused behavior among students, whereas ceilings above eight
feet would probably lead to more active and social behavior. These conclusions were based on
observations of child-care centers and interviews with caretakers. Read and colleagues (1999) found that
lower ceiling heights were associated with greater cooperative behavior levels among preschool
children—a conclusion that somewhat contradicts Moore and colleagues (1996). Many other researchers
identified ceiling height as an important variable that is likely to affect student performance, but did not
make any specific suggestions about what that relationship might be (Glen I. Earthman, 2004; Olds, 1989;
Winchip, 1991). To the best of our knowledge, there is no research literature at all on room width
dimensions and cognitive performance, though one early study found that smaller rooms were associated
with greater stress, compared to larger rooms with the same number of occupants (Sundstrom, 1975).
While adjusting classroom widths and the ceiling heights has been suggested by various
researchers as a way to add value to the learning environment, it is difficult to ascertain, on the basis of
the existing evidence, in which direction it should be altered, what specific effects could be expected from
dimensional changes, and what confounding variables such as crowdedness, empty space, or symmetry
might contribute. In the current study, two options for the classroom dimensions were evaluated: (a)
narrow classroom of 15 ft. by 50 ft., designated as the “neutral” condition, and (b) wide classroom of 22
ft. by 50 ft. The ceiling's height was not manipulated in the current study; it was held constant at 12 ft. in
each of the classroom variants. The room size (width, length, and height) for neutral condition was
selected based on the most common classroom size in the site of the current study.
1.3. List of hypotheses
Hypothesis 1. Isolated changes in architectural design variables in a virtual classroom setting will be
associated with significant effects in EEG signatures, as well as with cognitive task performance.
Hypothesis 2. Direct window views to natural scenery added behind the instruction area will improve
cognitive task performance and will have a significant effect on EEG features.
Hypothesis 3. Views to natural scenery from a window added on the side-wall will improve cognitive task
performance and will have a significant effect on EEG features.
Hypothesis 4. Expansion of the classroom’s width will improve cognitive task performance and will have
a significant effect on EEG features.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
All participants gave informed written consent before participating in the experiment and were
compensated with a $25 gift card at the end of the study. The overall study protocol was approved by the
Institutional Review Board at the University of Houston.
2.1. Participants
Twenty-nine healthy human adults with normal or corrected-to-normal vision were recruited for the study
using a convenience sampling method (word-of-mouth and announcements on departmental e-mail lists).

--- PAGE 5 ---
5
Five of the participants had to be excluded due to technical issues during the physiological data-recording
(missing/incomplete data), and two additional participants were excluded due to extremely low task
accuracy scores (< 10%) across all conditions. The remaining 23 participants ranged in age from 18 to 55
years (M = 26.17, SD=10.4). The majority were university students (n=21), the other participants were
faculty members. Eight participants identified as female, and 13 identified as male, and none as other. All
of the participants were associated with the University of Houston, representing departments in
Architecture, Engineering, Biological Sciences, Humanities, Economics, and Computer Sciences. The
participants had a variety of national backgrounds—U.S., India, and Mexico were the most common—as
well as different ethnic backgrounds. Eleven participants reported as Asian, seven as Latinx and/or
Hispanic, one as Middle Eastern, and four as White non-Hispanic.
The participants were also asked to report their sleep patterns and rate their mental fatigue level at
the beginning of the experiment. Twenty-six percent reported getting seven or more hours of sleep the
previous night, 30% reported between six and seven hours of sleep, and 44% reported four to six hours of
sleep. Reported fatigue levels were relatively low (M=4.1, SD=1.9, on scale from 1 = low fatigue to 10 =
high fatigue). Participants also verified that to the best of their knowledge they were free of current
neurological conditions, and had abstained from any psychoactive substances prior to the study (except
for two who had recently consumed caffeine, within 1 hour prior to the study).
Participants were asked in a post-experiment survey to indicate their level of stress or discomfort
with the virtual reality experience and the EEG headset, (1=comfortable with no stress; 10 =
uncomfortable and stressful), and to report how realistic the virtual environment seemed (1=not similar to
reality; 10=very similar to reality). Reported discomfort levels were relatively low for the VR system
(M=4.1, SD=2.3) and for the EEG headset (M=3.8; SD=2.3). Participants found the VR environment to
be reasonably realistic (M=6.2; SD=1.5).
2.2. VR development
The virtual environment was developed using Epic Games’ Unreal Engine (www.epicgames.com), which
is one of the most sophisticated virtual-reality simulation programs available today. The Unreal Engine
uses blueprint scripting and thus allows for a quick learning curve on the part of researchers and
designers, making the construction and modification of the new virtual-reality architectural models a
relatively easy process. For each of the different classroom conditions, one architectural element of the
control environment was modified (the window placement or room width). A widget was used to display
cognitive tests on a virtual projector screen at the front of the classrooms (Figure 1). The experience was
presented to the research participants using an Oculus Rift head-mounted display, a lightweight, high
fidelity headset with a strong market share. The headset uses a 1920 x 1080 pixel (960 x 1080 pixel per
eye) low-persistence OLED display with a refresh rate up to 75 Hz.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6
Figure 1. A. The virtual-reality headset along with EEG, EOG, and EKG as worn by a study participant;
and B. a two-dimensional capture from the actual immersive 3D experience, showing the Digit Span Test
in the virtual classroom with a side-window.
2.3. Classroom design conditions
Four design conditions were evaluated. First, the researchers constructed an exact VR rendering of a real
university classroom with no windows; this was designated as the “neutral” or default classroom. Second,
the neutral classroom was altered by adding one window to the left-hand wall, with a view of partly sunny
skies and treetops. Third, the neutral classroom was altered by extending the room width and adding two
windows at the front of the room, with a similar tree-top view (no side-window in this condition). Fourth,
the neutral classroom was altered by extending the front wall to create a wider space, with no added
windows (Figure 2A). All four of these design conditions were experienced by each participant; the order
in which they appeared for any given participant was randomized.
2.4. Cognitive tests
In each of the four classroom design conditions, the participants performed five cognitive tests (Figure
2B). The selection of the tests was based on neuropsychological tests commonly used in literature related
to cognitive performance evaluation among students (e.g. Nigg et al., 1999; Kim et al., 2020). These were
presented in the same order in each classroom variation: the Digit Span Test (DST), the Benton Test
(BT), the Stroop Color Interference Test (ST), an Arithmetic Test (AT), and then a Visual Memory Test
(VMT) (Kalantari et al., 2020). The DST, BT, and VMT tests ended when a certain number of responses
were submitted (22, 4, and 22, respectively). The ST and AT were time-limited at 25 s.
The DST (Wechsler, 1981) is an instrument frequently used by researchers to assess working
memory, attention, encoding, and auditory processing. Participants listened to a spoken sequence of
random digits and then repeated the sequence by selecting the correct digits on the screen. The study used
four sequences of progressively greater lengths (four, five, six, and seven digits). Participants were given

--- PAGE 7 ---
7
visual and auditory feedback indicating correct and incorrect answers. There was no time limit for this
test. Participants were scored based on the total number of correct digits (out of 22 total possible through
all four sequences) and on their longest complete span of correct numbers (up to a maximum of seven).
The BT (Benton, 1945; Sivan, 1992) is a measure of visual perception, visual memory, and the
capacity for visual discrimination. Participants were shown a complex geometric visual stimulus for three
seconds, followed by a set of four visual options (correct answer plus three similar variations), and were
asked to select the one that was identical to the original stimulus. Each BT session for a classroom
condition included four trials, each showing a different geometric test stimulus, and different incorrect
options on the response screen. No feedback was given about the correct or incorrect answers. There was
no time limit. Participants were scored on the number of correct trials (out of 4).
The ST consists of quickly identifying the font color of a textually congruent or incongruent word
presented on a screen; for example the word “red” presented in a green-colored font represents the
incongruent condition (Stroop, 1935). Words were presented serially, with a new word presented
immediately after each response; the frequency of congruent and incongruent conditions was balanced,
and the words and text colors were counterbalanced in order across sessions. Participants were given 25
seconds and asked to complete as many trials as possible. Visual and auditory feedback was given for
correct and incorrect answers. Participants were scored on the ratio of correct answers to total attempted
answers.
The AT was developed by the current researchers for this study based on a commonly used
quantitative skills format; it presented participants with two simple arithmetic expressions (e.g., 8 – 6 and
6 / 3), and asked them to determine which of the two expressions was greater or if they were equal.
Participants were given 25 seconds to complete as many comparisons as possible, with a new question
presented immediately after each response. Visual feedback for correct and incorrect answers was
provided. Participants were scored on the number of correct responses.
The VMT presents participants with a grid of light and dark squares for two seconds, after which
the participant is asked to recreate the pattern on a blank grid (Della Sala et al., 1999). This test was
repeated four times. During the first two trials 4 dark squares were randomly placed on a 3 x 3 grid, and
during the second two trials 7 dark squares were randomly placed on a 4 x 4 grid. There was no time limit
on this test, and audio and visual feedback were provided for correct and incorrect answers. Participants
were scored on the total number of correct squares out of 22 possible correct answers.
2.5. Data collection
This study was made possible by the use of synchronization tools to collect and collate multiple data
streams, specifically the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) software package (Kothe, 2014). LSL incorporated
data from multiple physiological sensors, participant task responses, and video screen recordings, as well
as the insertion of event markers and participant responses. This video data was used to calculate the test
response scores as well as to create a complete list of events to correlate with the physiological data.
EEG activity was measured using a 63-channel actiCHamp (Brain Products GmbH). Fifty-seven
electrodes were devoted to scalp EEG recordings, an additional 4 electrodes to EOG data (two placed
laterally 1 cm outside the eyes, and two vertically from the right eye), and the final 2 electrodes for EKG
measurement (Figure 1A). The BrainVision Recorder software package was used for all
electrophysiological data-recording, and EEGLAB software, including custom scripts in MATLAB
(Mathworks, Natick, MA) was used for data-cleaning and analysis. The current analysis only involves the
57 scalp electrodes.
Participants interacted with the virtual environment by using an Xbox handheld controller. This
features a small joystick that was used to toggle between multiple-choice answers, and buttons that were
pressed to indicate the selection of the answer. Participants were able to look around the 3D space of the

--- PAGE 8 ---
8
virtual classrooms by moving their heads, but they were not able to change their position within the
virtual classroom. Head-accelerometer data was collected, but not analyzed or reported here.
Figure 2. Overview of the study design. A. Four classroom design conditions were evaluated, and B. five
cognitive tests were performed. C. The experiment’s timeline included a familiarization period followed
by exposure to each classroom environment in a random order.
2.6. Experimental procedure
Prior to beginning their individual session, each participant was provided with an introduction to the
study and its goals, provided their written consent and completed a demographic questionnaire. The
participant was then fitted with the EEG cap and the VR headset, and allowed to “play” with the headset
using a non-test environment for a few minutes to become accustomed to the equipment. At the start of
the formal experiment, baseline EEG readings were taken by asking the participant to focus on a spot on
the wall for one minute with eyes open, and then to rest for one minute with eyes closed. The participant
was then given a ten-minute period to become familiar with the cognitive tests to be performed and to
practice the input methods for submitting test answers (Figure 2C).
The participant was then asked to complete the five cognitive tests in each different virtual
classroom environment. The testing took place in two stages, with one minute of rest in between. In the
first stage, participants completed the DST and then the BT in each of the four different classroom
settings. While the order of the tasks was constant, the classroom variations appeared in a randomized

--- PAGE 9 ---
9
sequence. After each classroom design, participants were asked to rate their mental fatigue and stress
level on a scale from 1–10 (1=“not at all” and 10=“extremely”). After completing the first round of tasks,
the participants were given a 60-second break with the headset on, during which time they were
encouraged to relax while looking at a virtual beach scene.
In the second stage, participants were again asked to complete cognitive tasks in the different
classrooms, this time including the Stroop test, the AT, and the VMT. Similar to the first stage, the order
of the tests was constant while the order of the room conditions was randomized, and after each classroom
the participants were asked to rate their mental fatigue and stress level using the same 1–10 scale.
Commonly measured environmental indicators, such as heat, noise, and air quality, were held constant
throughout the experiment, thus allowing for a controlled investigation of the effects of window
placements and room dimensions.
2.7. Analysis of test performance data
Response accuracy, defined as the total number of correct responses divided by the total number of
submitted responses, was utilized as a metric to evaluate the participants’ performance on all cognitive
tests. Additional test performance metrics were also measured: total number of correct responses, for the
two tests that were time-limited at 25 s (the ST and AT), and total test duration, for those tests that were
not time-limited (DST, BT, and VMT). For these latter three tests, the researchers also computed
participants’ Inverse Efficiency Scores following Townsend and Ashby (Townsend & Ashby, 1978). This
is calculated as IES = RT/(1-PE), where in our case RT is the overall task duration in one environment
(not reaction-time), and PE is the proportion of error (1 – PercentCorrect). This is an appropriate measure
to use when the proportion of error is low (Bruyer & Brysbaert, 2011; Vandierendonck, 2017), as was the
case in the current experiment.
The distributions of the test performance metrics between the four classroom design conditions
were compared using a Kruskal-Wallis test at a significance level of p < 0.05 and p < 0.0025 (Bonferroni-
correction for p < 0.05 / 20 comparisons).
2.8. EEG data processing
The EEG data were analyzed using the EEGLAB software package (Delorme & Makeig, 2004). Raw .xdf
data files were imported at their original sampling rate of 500 Hz. The data were band-pass filtered
between 0.5 Hz and 50 Hz using the EEGLAB function pop_eegfiltnew (FIR, Hamming windowed,
transition bandwidth 0.5 Hz).
Artifact subspace reconstruction (ASR) (Chang et al., 2019; C. A. E. Kothe & Jung, 2016) was
carried out through its EEGLAB implementation in the function clean_artifacts. This function was used to
remove channels that showed no signal activity (flat line threshold: 10 s), noisy signals (noisy line
threshold: 4 std), or a poor correlation with adjacent channels (correlation threshold: 0.75). ASR was also
used to remove short-time high amplitude artifacts in the continuous data, with a cut-off threshold of 20
standard deviations for identification of corrupted subspaces. Removed channels were then reintroduced
to the data using spherical interpolation from neighboring channels. The data were common-average
referenced over all of the scalp channels.
The data were then run through an independent component analysis (ICA) using the extended
Infomax algorithm (Onton et al., 2006). Artifactual components representing eye-movements, head
movements, and other gross non-brain components were removed automatically using the ICLabel
EEGLAB plugin, with a label probability threshold of 0.90 for muscle, eye, heart, and channel-noise
related artifacts (Pion-Tonachini et al., 2017, 2019). This automated pre-processing method was verified
through visual inspection.

--- PAGE 10 ---
10
2.9. Analysis of EEG features between design conditions
The researchers examined EEG features in these preprocessed datasets during the first 25 s for each of the
five cognitive tests, within each of the four environmental conditions (20 classes in total). We used
various spectral (frequency-band power) and sensor-based connectivity EEG features to train a classifier
to distinguish the neutral classroom condition from each of the other design variations. Thus, the three
design condition comparisons were: (a) Neutral vs One-Window, (b) Neutral vs Two-Windows, and (c)
Neutral vs Wide. These three comparisons were carried out separately for each of the five cognitive tests.
We chose a machine-learning classification approach to address the question of how different
classroom environments affect cognitive performance for two reasons. First, we were agnostic to the
potential cognitive impacts of these architectural design features, and machine-learning classifier methods
can reveal statistically rigorous group differences even when a priori hypotheses are not clear. Second,
given the possibility of finding no significant differences in task-performance across the classroom
designs, a machine-learning approach was believed to be appropriate to help identify neural responses to
the environments that might not correlate with behavioral performance in our current experimental
paradigm.
2.9.1. EEG feature extraction
Two types of EEG features were analyzed at the sensor level: frequency band-power and partial directed
coherence (PDC). These features were calculated over a 4-second sliding window with a 2-second
overlap. The EEG features were taken as the relative change from baseline (1 min rest with eyes open)
from each participant. The resulting features were each standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing
by the standard deviation among all participants’ data.
Frequency band-power features provide information about neural synchronization or
desynchronization observed at scalp locations (Pfurtscheller & Lopes Da Silva, 1999; Sharma et al.
2017b). This results in an indication of how strongly a particular frequency range contributes to an EEG
time-series signal. The Multitaper power spectral density estimate function (Thomson, 1982) in Matlab
(pmtm) was used to calculate the frequency-band power, with a time-half-bandwidth product of 4. The
band power features were calculated for all 57 electrodes for five typical EEG frequency bands: Delta (1–
4 Hz), Theta (4–8 Hz), Alpha (8–12 Hz), Beta (12–30 Hz), and Gamma (30–40 Hz). This method
produced a total of 285 frequency band-power features.
PDC provides a metric for functional interactions observed between electrodes (Cruz-Garza et al.,
2020). It is based on the concept of partial coherence (Baccalá & Sameshima, 2001), a technique that
quantifies the relationship between two signals while avoiding volume conduction. PDC measures
directional (i.e. causal) influences between two EEG signals, which determines if there is transfer of
information from one electrode to another. PDC was estimated using a multivariate autoregressive model
(MVAR) using 28 electrodes distributed across the scalp, to reduce the number of comparisons to be
made and still evaluating connectivity across the scalp. We used an MVAR model order of 15 (30 ms),
which was obtained by using the ARFIT algorithm (Schneider and Neumaier, 2001) and evaluating the
SBC criterion, which is least affected by noise (Porcaro et al., 2009). The observed PDC estimates were
evaluated bidirectionally for all pairs of electrodes in the five frequency bands, yielding a total of 3920
PDC features.
2.9.2. EEG feature selection
The discriminant power of each EEG feature was estimated using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test,
which does not assume the data are normally distributed. The features across all study participants were
ranked based on the p-values obtained from the Kuskal-Wallis tests for each two-class design condition
comparison. The features that yielded a p-value smaller than 2.4 x 10-6 (Bonferroni correction of p < 0.01
for 4205 features) were selected for visualization and analysis.

--- PAGE 11 ---
11
2.9.3. Machine learning classification
Support vector machines (SVMs) and linear discriminant analyses are the most common classifiers used
in EEG-based brain-computer interfaces (Lotte et al., 2018). They are often used as baseline comparisons
for the performance of emergent classifiers (Nakagome et al., 2020). The machine learning classifier used
for the EEG data in the current experiment was the kernel support vector machine (k-SVM), with a
polynomial kernel of degree 2 and box-constraint set to 1.
We defined 20 classes to be analyzed (based on five cognitive tests, each of which was conducted
in four different classroom variations). The goal of the machine learning process was to evaluate if it
could reliably differentiate a person’s brain activity between two design settings; and if this differentiation
was dependent on the cognitive test being performed (Hypothesis 1). To achieve class balance (Cruz-
Garza et al., 2014, Hernandez et al., 2014), we randomly selected 40 data samples (where one data sample
is a 4-second window of EEG data) from each participant for each of these 20 classes.
All comparisons were done in a pair-wise fashion (2-class problems), comparing the data samples
from one of the three altered design conditions against data from the “neutral” classroom. The
comparisons were done independently for each cognitive test. For each of the two-class comparisons, the
most discriminant features from the EEG data were ranked, then sequentially added to the classification
model and tested for predictive performance (Cruz-Garza et al., 2014). Along with the behavioral
performance results (e.g. participant accuracy and reaction time, etc.), these EEG machine-learning
analyses allowed the researchers to determine if the alterations in each classroom design had any
significant effect on the neural correlates of participants’ cognitive processes (Hypotheses 2, 3, and 4).
2.9.4. Training data set and testing data set
The machine learning procedure was conducted so that the identified EEG features could be tested for
predictive power in an unseen participant. Thus, one of the participants was selected to be excluded from
the training set. The data from the rest of the participants (n=22) was used as the training set to create the
k-SVM classification model, using 5-fold cross-validation.
The process was iterated 23 times, excluding each participant in turn from the training set, and
then evaluating the model based on its ability to predict the excluded individual’s data. This approach
provides strong verification of the model’s predictive power. In each iteration, the training set contained
880 samples per class (22 participants), and the test set contained 40 samples per class (1 participant).
2.9.5. Classification model evaluation
The distribution of the classification accuracy for the testing set was used as the main metric for
evaluating the machine learning classification performance. The distribution of the classification accuracy
was compared to classification models and test data obtained from class-label scrambled EEG data
(Agashe et al., 2015), within each comparison test. Statistical significance was evaluated between the
classification accuracy in the test set and in the scrambled data with a Kruskal-Wallis test at a significance
threshold of p < 0.003 and p < 0.0006 (p < 0.05 / 15 comparisons, and p < 0.01 / 15 comparisons,
respectively), which applied the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. The full machine
learning process is summarized in Figure 3. The ranked EEG features were incrementally used to create
classification models and test them to evaluate classification accuracy, using the top 400 best-ranked
features.

--- PAGE 12 ---
12
Figure 3. EEG data analysis and machine learning classification implementation, with sample data from
one participant as it goes through the classification pipeline. A. EEG feature classification flowchart. The
black marks on the top right corner indicate that a visual example of the process is shown in sections B-G.
B. EEG data from one participant, in the Wide classroom design condition, for 2 s in all cognitive tests.
C. Feature extraction: frequency band-power for each channel; and connectivity using PDC. C. The 14

--- PAGE 13 ---
13
most discriminant features to classify between the Neutral vs Wide design conditions. The classifier
model shown corresponds to the VMT. D. Machine learning data distribution in the Training and Testing
sets for 23 iterations. In each iteration, the data from an unseen participant was used for the Testing set. E.
Machine learning example for one iteration. A classification model (k-SVM polynomial degree 2) was
built from the Training set, and evaluated in the Testing set. G. The receiver operating characteristic
curve (ROC), classification matrix (with number of samples and percentage representations), and
classification accuracy are used to evaluate the classification performance.
3. RESULTS
3.1. Cognitive test performance results
No overall significant effects were found for the different classroom conditions in relation to the
participants’ test response accuracy, the number of responses, completion time, or inverse efficiency
scores, based on a Kruskal-Wallis test at a significance level of p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 (Figure 4). The
response accuracy showed a strong skewness toward perfect scores for the BT, the VMT, the ST, and the
AT. These results suggest that the participants were not challenged by these tasks, had achieved, via
practice, mastery of them, and/or were very focused on completing these tasks successfully. The DST
showed a broader distribution for the response accuracy metric, which may have been influenced by the
feedback conditions and/or the nature of the test: if a participant selected a wrong number in the pattern,
then frequently the following numbers selected would also be incorrect.

--- PAGE 14 ---
14
Figure 4. Cognitive test performance for all participants across the different classroom design conditions.
No significant differences were found among the different classroom designs in regard to: A. response
accuracy, B. total number of correct responses (for time-limited tests), C. Inverse Efficiency Scores, and
D. completion time.
3.2. EEG data-analysis results
The machine learning method used frequency band-power and connectivity features of the EEG data to
attempt to classify the different classroom design conditions. The resulting model was evaluated based on
its ability to predict the EEG patterns of any participant that was excluded from the training set, in
comparison against a control prediction based on scrambled data. The test-set classification accuracy
distributions for each comparison are shown in Figure 5.
The classification results show that the different classroom design conditions were associated
with consistent changes in the participants’ EEG data, and that a classification model could be built with
the predictive power to identify which design condition a new participant is experiencing. These results
support Hypothesis 1.
The predictive power of the EEG features to identify the classroom design condition was specific
to the cognitive test performed. When the participants were engaged in the VMT, the classifier could
identify any of the three design conditions compared to the Neutral classroom with statistically significant
success (p < 0.003). Specifically, the test-set median classification accuracies for the three design
conditions evaluated were: 55.0% Neutral vs One-Window, 57.5% Neutral vs One-Window, 61.3%
Neutral vs One-Window. The classifier also distinguished, significantly higher than chance (p < 0.003),
the design conditions evaluated for the Benton Test in the Neutral vs One-Window comparison, and in the
Neutral vs Two-Windows comparison; with test-set median classification accuracies of 61.3% and 56.3%,
respectively.
The Digit Span Test also yielded EEG features that differed between the Neutral vs One-Window
comparison, and in the Neutral vs Two-Windows comparison; with test-set median classification
accuracies of 53.8% and 51.3%, respectively. These results partially support Hypothesis 2, 3, and 4, as the
changes in EEG frequency band-power and connectivity associated with the design alterations were found
only during the cognitive tests that required short-term memory encoding: the Digit Span Test, the Benton
Test, and the Visual Memory Test. The ranked classification models were evaluated incrementally using 1
to 400 best-ranked features in each comparison. At 180 features, we observed the most comparisons
reaching classification accuracies that were statistically significantly higher than chance levels
(Supplementary Materials Figure 1).

--- PAGE 15 ---
15
Figure 5. EEG classification accuracy results. A k-SVM (polynomial degree 2) classification model was
created from the training data of 22 participants; and tested on unseen data from 1 participant- for 22
iterations. Each dot indicates the classification accuracy in one of the test sets based on the classification
model obtained from its corresponding training set. To assess the validity of our results, we also
calculated chance levels by scrambling the EEG data class labels in each 2-class comparison. The
distribution for the scrambled class labels data is shown in gray. EEG classification accuracies are above
the chance levels in most of the classes, and are significantly higher than the chance levels in 5 of the
classes, supporting the validity of our method. Statistical significance was calculated using a pair-wise
Kruskal-Wallis test.
The 180 most relevant features supporting the k-SVM classifiers where the classification models
proved robust across participants are shown in Figure 6. This indicates the intra-participant changes in
EEG as a percentage change from baseline “rest with eyes open”, in response to the different classroom
environments. Only those features that achieved a statistical significance threshold of p < 2.4 x 10-6 are
displayed. The distribution of frequency band-power features showed significant differences in centro-
parietal and frontal regions when they were compared between the Neutral design and the three
alternative design conditions: One Window, Two Windows, and Wide classroom. Connectivity analysis
reinforces this finding by showing that there are changes in the transfer of information from centro-
parietal to frontal electrodes in the different classroom design conditions. Frequency band-power features
were more discriminative between design conditions than the PDC connectivity features evaluated here.
For the Neutral vs. One-Window comparison, the EEG band-power feature changes were characterized
by an increase in relative alpha and beta power in the centro-parietal and frontal regions of the scalp. In
contrast, the Neutral vs. Two Windows, and the Neutral vs Wide, both showed a decrease in relative
alpha and beta power in these same regions. The VMT was the only cognitive test for which the occipital
electrodes had the most discriminative power between the different design conditions (Figure 6).
The features that drive this classification performance are found in centro-parietal and frontal
electrode locations (Figure 6). Additionally, connectivity analysis reinforces that there are changes in the

--- PAGE 16 ---
16
transfer of information from centro-parietal to frontal electrodes. These features are found mostly in the
theta and alpha frequency bands (4-12 Hz). The features that reach the statistical significance level, and
their distributions, are different between the design conditions vs the neutral condition, are predominantly
frequency band-power features. Connectivity features, measured using PDC, reach the threshold at a
lower rate.

--- PAGE 17 ---
17
Figure 6. EEG statistically significant feature distribution. The number of features statistically significant
features (p < 2.4 x 10-6 ) corresponding to frequency band-power and connectivity are displayed as bar
graphs, for all five frequency bands analyzed. The scalp maps show the spatial distributions of the
features , and the number of times an electrode reached the significance threshold.
Figure 7. EEG alpha band-power feature visualization. The topographic plots display the alpha band
features that reached a statistical significance level of p < 2.4 x 10-6 (p < 0.01 Bonferroni-corrected for
4205 features). These plots show the difference between the design conditions compared with the Neutral
classroom design; evaluated in three cognitive tests: DST, BT, and VMT.
The frequency band-power features were further visualized by plotting the difference in the
features’ distribution between the design conditions and the neutral classroom in specific frequency
bands. In Figure 7, we display the difference in the distribution median for the alpha band. Only those
comparisons that yielded robust classification performance in our inter-participant machine learning
approach are displayed. The pattern of relevant features, synchronization and desynchronization in the
alpha band, was different for each cognitive test evaluated; with an overall consistent pattern within the
cognitive tests: the DST shows significant features in bilateral parietal and right frontal regions of the
scalp; the BT shows the most significant features in centro-parietal regions and right-frontal regions;
while the VMT shows significant features across a network of bilateral occipital, central, and medial
frontal regions of the scalp. These results suggest that the assessment of an architectural design element in
an indoor environment is dependent on the task performed by the participants.
For the DST, there was alpha-band synchronization within the parietal area, and among right-
frontal electrodes, identified by an increase in band-power in the Design condition compared with the
Neutral classroom (Figure 7). In the BT a similar pattern was found as for the DST, but parietal and
right-frontal locations showed desynchronization in the alpha band in the design condition evaluated. The
VMT was found to yield the largest number of features that reached the significance threshold. These
features are distributed across the scalp, with an overall desynchronization in alpha power with the largest

--- PAGE 18 ---
18
decrease in power in centro-parietal and mid-frontal electrodes. This overall desynchronization is coupled
with localized right-parietal and right-frontal alpha-band synchronization.
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This study aimed to address logistical challenges that have limited the robust empirical study of indoor
environment design and in particular classroom design. Using an immersive VR environment allowed for
precise adjustments in isolated architectural variables, and was combined with an EEG-based approach to
collect objective neural data from participants as they completed cognitive tests in these varied
environments. A post-hoc machine-learning approach helped identify the EEG signals that best
differentiated classroom architectural design conditions.
The cognitive test performance results showed no significant differences in accuracy or response
times, response time, or related measures resulting from the architectural design features studied (window
placement and classroom width). It is notable that this outcome is not commensurate with previous work
that has found, for example, views of nature to be associated with improved working memory and
decreased mental fatigue (Bratman et al., 2015; Gladwell et al., 2012; Li & Sullivan, 2016). One possible
explanation for these contradictory results may be the length of exposure. Kaplan’s (1995) Attention
Restoration Theory and Ulrich and colleagues’ (1991) Stress Reduction Theory both propose that the
beneficial effects of nature enable involve the attenuation of certain cognitive, affective and physiological
functions — e.g. directed attention (Kaplan), or stress response of the sympathetic nervous system (Ulrich
and colleagues) – resulting from time spent viewing nature. In the current study, participants remained in
each virtual classroom for less than two minutes and were constantly under mild stress while completing
tests in quick succession. Thus, there may not have been enough contemplative time for the window
views to have a restorative effect. It is also possible that the virtual environment may have omitted some
of the holistic features responsible for cognitive restoration (such as robust complexity in the
environment, a sense of physical/tactile relationship, and the conscious awareness of connections to
nature), though additional research would be needed to verify if such factors are of primary significance.
Another possible explanation for the lack of significant differences in the cognitive test results might be
related to the fact that participants skewed strongly toward perfect scores (Figure 4A), which may result
from their advanced cognitive ability as part of an academic. It is also potentially an indication of the
participants’ consistent engagement with the cognitive tasks, and/or or due to the practice effects of
having substantial time to master each task before this evaluation.
The study found consistent and significant changes in EEG features during exposure to the
architectural design variables, more prominently for cognitive tasks that required short-term memory
encoding. This is a promising result, as it indicates a pathway toward the more robust scientific study of
the effects of architectural design on cognitive processes. The fact that the classifier could successfully
distinguish environments based on brain activity, despite no significant behavioral differences, in a sense
strengthens this conclusion. Had the different classroom environments been associated with dramatically
different response accuracies or reaction times, the classifier results could be interpreted as simply a
reflection of participants’ task performance. Instead, the classifier results can be interpreted as
representing subtle cognitive, neural and/or psychological effects of the different architectural designs
themselves. The leave-one-participant-out strategy is a robust method of cross-validating a classifier
(Peng et al., 2019). The leave-one-out cross-validation strategy in the test set (unseen participant’s data)
provides a robust estimation for the generalization potential of the k-SVM classifier. This method
produces a slightly different training dataset and classification boundary (Figure 3F) in each iteration of
the training and test sets.
It is important to reflect on why the classroom design features which seemed to induce
differentiated neural differences only did so in tasks that required maintaining presented stimuli in
working memory (Benton, Visual Memory, and Digit Span; Figure 5). In contrast to the Stroop Test and

--- PAGE 19 ---
19
the Arithmetic Test, which rely on executive control and arithmetic ability, respectively, the three
working memory tasks (Benton, Visual Memory, and Digit Span) involve holding recently presented
information in memory, in accordance with the encoding-specificity hypothesis. This likely involved
storing some aspects of the context surrounding the task-relevant information (Staudigl & Hanslmayr,
2019), potentially strengthening the mental representations of the different classroom designs. It would
follow that if the mental representation of the surrounding environment was stronger, a classifier could
more effectively distinguish mental activity from short-term memory tasks occurring in those different
environments. Additionally, it may not necessarily be just the mental representation of the task context
that is strengthened. Other downstream cognitive processes may be subtly affected by each environment
to the extent that does not dramatically affect the accuracy and response-time results, but which a
sufficiently robust EEG classifier can detect.
Research on the encoding-specificity hypothesis contributes to this interpretation (Grissmann et
al., 2020; Vogelsang et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2017). The encoding specificity hypothesis proposes that
memory recall is greater when the recall conditions or environment are similar to the original conditions
or environment during memory encoding. A prominent related explanation to account for the ample
evidence supporting the encoding specificity hypothesis is the neural reinstatement hypothesis, which
proposes that the reoccurrence of neural activity during recall that was happening in the encoding stage
should enhance and support memory recall (Crowley et al., 2019). This suggests that neural activity
associated with a context and environment may be stronger when a memory task is involved than when a
non-memory task is involved. Furthermore, the strongest encoding-specific effects are expected when the
memory task and the context are in the same sensory modality (Staudigl & Hanslmayr, 2019). This
supports our observation that the EEG classifier seemed to find more significantly classifiable neural
features for the Benton Test and Visual Memory Test, than for the auditory Digit Span Test. This
increased number of informative features in the VMT and BT, vs the DST, was observed across all three
classroom comparisons (Figure 7 and Supplementary Materials Figure 1), although further statistical
analyses and experiments are needed to replicate and verify this observation. An open question remains,
however, regarding whether the encoding-specificity hypothesis would account for classifier performance
in “real-world” environments, in which design features are not carefully controlled. Regarding the general
effect of each design on neural activity across cognitive tasks, further experiments and analyses are
needed. Such experiments should use longer sessions in each design condition, and should measure
baseline resting activity within each classroom environment, before and/or after doing tasks.
The specific features of the recorded EEG activity – the different frequency band-power values
and transfer of information between different scalp electrodes – that were found in the present study to be
most informative for the environment-classifier, converge with other theories about the role of the
environment in task-specific cognitive functioning, such as the Parietal-Frontal Integration Theory
(Vakhtin et al., 2014). Other source-localization methods, or studies using neuro-imaging modalities with
a higher spatial resolution (e.g. fMRI), are needed in order to make strong conclusions about the role of
specific anatomical and functional regions in cognitive performance differences caused by different
environments. However, our machine-learning classifier results suggest that the Dorsal Attention
Network is implicated, specifical connectivity between dorso-medial pre-frontal cortex and superior
parietal areas (Figure 6; Spreng et al., 2013), including alpha power differences in expected visual and
motor-planning networks (Figure 7; Zumer et al., 2014). However, the lack of behavioral differences
between classrooms does suggest that the most predictive neural features did not involve performance-
enhancing or task-performance-supporting neural activity. Nevertheless, it is possible that the practice
effects – the fact participants had already achieved high proficiency in these tasks due to previous
exposure – dominate the performance results. In that case, perhaps the different classrooms could lead to
performance differences in the right conditions (such as prolonged exposure, or using less familiar or
repetitive tasks), which in turn might change or enhance the classifiable different neural responses.

--- PAGE 20 ---
20
An additional set of questions to answer regards the specific effects of each classroom
environment. First, we must consider that it is possible the unique demands of each task dominate the
results, obscuring the cognitive effects of the different classroom designs. For example, among the tasks,
the classifier found the most significant scalp regions when distinguishing the Visual Memory Test from
the control classroom. We postulate (as discussed above) that this is explained in part by the encoding
specificity hypothesis. Nevertheless, the classifier seemed to require unique EEG features for each
experimental contrast, suggesting each classroom design had a unique influence on participants’ neural
dynamics. For example, a wider classroom seemed to modulate alpha power in left posterior tempero-
parietal cortex compared to the control classroom in all three contrasts (wide > control, in the Digit Span
Test; but wide < control in the two visual memory tests); this cortical area contributed no significant
distinguishing alpha band features in the One-window and Two-window contrasts. Another example of a
room-specific feature of interest is the seemingly bilateral distribution of occipital, central, and frontal
cortex features (both spectral and connectivity features) that distinguished the Two-window condition,
across cognitive tasks (Figure 6). The occipital bilaterality, as well as the parietal cross-hemispheric
connectivity patterns, might be the result of the symmetrical distribution of the two windows across the
visual field, but further work is needed to replicate and explain the bilateral distribution of relevant
spectral features across other cortical areas.
The novel experimental/analytical approach and the results of this project may be of interest to
researchers in multiple fields. Designers are likely to be excited to consider the wealth of useful findings
that will emerge as this neural approach to evaluating user responses continues to evolve. The analysis
conducted here, showing rigorous evidence that brain activity responses can be classified in association
with specific architectural design elements, points toward a promising future for the use of physiological
data in evidence-based design. This approach may someday be used to evaluate the impact of important
environmental design decisions prior to physical construction, by collecting the physiological as well as
conscious reactions of the intended user population. In the field of human neuroscience, the results of the
current study expand on previous work showing that sensor-level feature extraction combined with
machine learning can meaningfully distinguish environmental and cognitive variables, ultimately leading
toward the implementation of more mobile, low-density EEG headsets to take the technology into real-
world settings (Cruz-Garza et al., 2020; Ravindran et al., 2019; Rounds et al., 2020).
4.1. Limitations
The number of participants in this study was relatively small, which can increase the likelihood of a type
II error (false negative findings). Furthermore, a large majority of the participants were male university
students, with a relatively high degree of computer experience. A recent study on the effectiveness of VR
learning as compared to hands-on learning reported that individuals who identified as male, and those
having prior experience with computer games, performed better in the VR learning environment
compared to their female and non-gamer counterparts, even when controlling for level of VR experience
(Madden et al., 2020). This raises the possibility that responses to architectural designs in VR
environments could be mediated by sex and/or gender, driven by prior VR experience. Future studies in
the area of virtual classroom design can benefit from using larger and more diverse participant pools, with
a special emphasis on considering gender and previous gaming experience as possible mediating
variables. These factors should also be considered in ongoing work to confirm correspondences between
real-world and VR neural patterns.
The cognitive tests that were used in this experiment are well studied and have been shown to
have high reliability and validity in laboratory studies. However, the implications of such performance
measures for long-term learning outcomes is not straightforward. Future studies may focus on context-
relevant tasks that are more directly related to realistic learning experiences. The exposure duration for
each environmental condition was very short in our study (1-2 minutes), which may have limited any
restorative effect of the window views. Additionally, the “ceiling effect”, in which many participants

--- PAGE 21 ---
21
scored nearly perfectly on many tasks, limits some of the conclusions that can be drawn about the
influence of these different environments.
4.2. Future directions
According to The State of Technology in Education Report (Promethean, 2020), virtual reality is now
seen as the third most important growth area for technology in education, after cloud computing and
online assessment, and its adoption will likely increase dramatically as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic. How should these new learning spaces be designed? Empirical tests of controlled changes in
virtual environments could lead to the optimization of design elements to better support distance learning.
Future studies in this area can examine even more granular interventions (for example by examining
many small changes in the width, depth, and height of classrooms) to optimize such parameters for the
general population, or even for specific demographic groups or individuals. It may turn out that different
kinds of educational tasks and different student learning styles may be supported best by different
classroom design features. In the virtual context where the environment can be quickly and readily
adjusted, it may be possible for students to effortlessly switch between environments that optimize their
performance on different tasks. It is even technologically feasible for each student to be immersed in a
customized virtual learning space suited to his or her needs, while still interacting with teachers and peers
in their own customized environments. The optimization of these virtual environments will lead to
findings that can later be translated and tested in the physical world.

--- PAGE 22 ---
22
References
Adam, G. E., Carter III, R., Cheuvront, S. N., Merullo, D. J., Castellani, J. W., Lieberman, H. R., &
Sawka, M. N. (2008). Hydration effects on cognitive performance during military tasks in
temperate and cold environments. Physiology & Behavior, 93(4–5), 748–756.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.11.028
Agashe, H. A., Paek, A. Y., Zhang, Y., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L. (2015). Global cortical activity predicts
shape of hand during grasping. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 9, 121.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00121
Baccalá, L. A., & Sameshima, K. (2001). Partial directed coherence: A new concept in neural structure
determination. Biological Cybernetics, 84(6), 463-474. https://doi.org/10.1007/PL00007990
Bagot, K. L., Allen, F. C. L., & Toukhsati, S. (2015). Perceived restorativeness of children’s school
playground environments: Nature, playground features and play period experiences. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 41, 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.11.005
Banaei, M., Hatami, J., Yazdanfar, A., & Gramann, K. (2017). Walking through architectural spaces: The
impact of interior forms on human brain dynamics. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11, 477.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00477
Bandelow, S., Maughan, R., Shirreffs, S., Ozgünen, K., Kurdak, S., Ersöz, G., Binnet, M., & Dvorak, J.
(2010). The effects of exercise, heat, cooling and rehydration strategies on cognitive function in
football players. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 20, 148–160.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2010.01220.x
Barrett, P., Davies, F., Zhang, Y., & Barrett, L. (2015). The impact of classroom design on pupils’
learning: Final results of a holistic, multi-level analysis. Building and Environment, 89, 118-133
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.02.013
Benfield, J. A., Rainbolt, G. N., Bell, P. A., & Donovan, G. H. (2015). Classrooms With Nature Views:
Evidence of Differing Student Perceptions and Behaviors. Environment and Behavior, 47(2),
140-157, https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916513499583
Benton, A. L. (1945). A visual retention test for clinical use. Archives of Neurology And Psychiatry,
54(3), 212–216. https://doi.org/10.1001/archneurpsyc.1945.02300090051008
Bratman, G. N., Daily, G. C., Levy, B. J., & Gross, J. J. (2015). The benefits of nature experience:
Improved affect and cognition. Landscape and Urban Planning, 138, 41-50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2015.02.005
Bruyer, R., & Brysbaert, M. (2011). Combining speed and accuracy in cognitive psychology: Is the
inverse efficiency score (IES) a better dependent variable than the mean reaction time (RT) and
the percentage of errors (PE)? Psychologica Belgica, 51(1), 5-13. https://doi.org/10.5334/pb-51-
1-5
Cama, R. (2009). Evidence-based healthcare design. John Wiley & Sons.
Castellucci, H. I., Arezes, P. M., Molenbroek, J. F. M., de Bruin, R., & Viviani, C. (2017). The influence
of school furniture on students’ performance and physical responses: Results of a systematic
review. Ergonomics, 60(1), 93-110. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2016.1170889
Chang, C.-Y., Hsu, S.-H., Pion-Tonachini, L., & Jung, T.-P. (2019). Evaluation of artifact subspace
reconstruction for automatic artifact components removal in multi-channel EEG recordings. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 67(4), 1114–1121.
Chen, J. (2016). Attention restoration benefits of integrating green space into office environment.
[Doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign].
http://hdl.handle.net/2142/93067
Choi, Y., Kim, M., & Chun, C. (2015). Measurement of occupants' stress based on electroencephalograms
(EEG) in twelve combined environments. Building and Environment, 88, 65-72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.10.003

--- PAGE 23 ---
23
Choi, Y., Kim, M., & Chun, C. (2019). Effect of temperature on attention ability based on
electroencephalogram measurements. Building and Environment, 147, 299-304.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.10.020
Choo, H., Nasar, J. L., Nikrahei, B., & Walther, D. B. (2017). Neural codes of seeing architectural styles.
Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep40201
Coburn, A., Vartanian, O., & Chatterjee, A. (2017). Buildings, beauty, and the brain: A neuroscience of
architectural experience. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 29(9), 1521-1531.
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01146
Collado, S., & Corraliza, J. A. (2015). Children’s Restorative Experiences and Self-Reported
Environmental Behaviors. Environment and Behavior, 47(1), 38-56.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916513492417
Contreras-Vidal, J. L., Robleto, D., & Cruz-Garza, J. G. (2019). Towards a Roadmap for Neuroaesthetics.
In Mobile Brain-Body Imaging and the Neuroscience of Art, Innovation and Creativity (pp. 215–
220). Springer.
Crowley, R., Bendor, D., & Javadi, A.-H. (2019). A review of neurobiological factors underlying the
selective enhancement of memory at encoding, consolidation, and retrieval. Progress in
Neurobiology, 179, 101615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2019.04.004
Cruz-Garza, Jesus G, Brantley, J. A., Nakagome, S., Kontson, K., Robleto, D., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L.
(2017). Mobile EEG Recordings in an Art Museum Setting. IEEE Dataport.
https://doi.org/10.21227/H2TM00
Cruz-Garza, J. G., Hernandez, Z. R., Nepaul, S., Bradley, K. K., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L. (2014). Neural
decoding of expressive human movement from scalp electroencephalography (EEG). Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 8(188), 188. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00188
Cruz-Garza, J. G., Sujatha Ravindran, A., Kopteva, A. E., Rivera Garza, C., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L.
(2020). Characterization of the stages of creative writing with mobile EEG using Generalized
Partial Directed Coherence. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14, 533. https://doi.org/10/ghnns7
Daisey, J. M., Angell, W. J., & Apte, M. G. (2003). Indoor air quality, ventilation and health symptoms in
schools: An analysis of existing information. Indoor Air, 13(LBNL-48287).
https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0668.2003.00153.x
Della Sala, S., Gray, C., Baddeley, A., Allamano, N., & Wilson, L. (1999). Pattern span: A tool for
unwelding visuo-spatial memory. Neuropsychologia, 37(10), 1189–1199.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(98)00159-6
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG
dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1),
9–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Demetriou, A., Kazi, S., Makris, N., & Spanoudis, G. (2020). Cognitive ability, cognitive self-awareness,
and school performance: From childhood to adolescence. Intelligence 79, 101432.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2020.101432
Dikker, S., Wan, L., Davidesco, I., Kaggen, L., Oostrik, M., McClintock, J., Rowland, J., Michalareas, G.,
Van Bavel, J. J., Ding, M., & Poeppel, D. (2017). Brain-to-Brain Synchrony Tracks Real-World
Dynamic Group Interactions in the Classroom. Current Biology, 27(9), 1375–1380.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.04.002
Edelstein, E. A., & Macagno, E. (2012). Form follows function: Bridging neuroscience and architecture.
In Springer Optimization and Its Applications. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-0745-5_3
Engelbrecht, K. (2003). The Impact of Color on Learning. NeoCon Perkins & Will.
Faber Taylor, A., & Kuo, F. E. (2009). Children With Attention Deficits Concentrate Better After Walk in
the Park. Journal of Attention Disorders, 12(5), 402–409. https://doi.org/10/btbppn
Gladwell, V. F., Brown, D. K., Barton, J. L., Tarvainen, M. P., Kuoppa, P., Pretty, J., Suddaby, J. M., &
Sandercock, G. R. H. (2012). The effects of views of nature on autonomic control. European
Journal of Applied Physiology, 112(9), 3379–3386. https://doi.org/10/fx4t92

--- PAGE 24 ---
24
Glen I. Earthman. (2004). Prioritization of 31 Criteria for School Building Adequacy. Manual.
Grissmann, S., Spüler, M., Faller, J., Krumpe, T., Zander, T. O., Kelava, A., Scharinger, C., & Gerjets, P.
(2020). Context Sensitivity of EEG-Based Workload Classification Under Different Affective
Valence. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 11(2), 327–334.
https://doi.org/10.1109/taffc.2017.2775616
Guan, H., Hu, S., Lu, M., He, M., Zhang, X., & Liu, G. (2020). Analysis of human electroencephalogram
features in different indoor environments. Building and Environment, 186, 107328.
https://doi.org/10/ghm25n
Hamilton, D. K., & Watkins, D. H. (2008). Evidence-based design for multiple building types. John
Wiley & Sons.
Harvey, E. J., & Kenyon, M. C. (2013). Classroom seating considerations for 21st century
students and faculty. Journal of Learning Spaces, 2(1).
Hernandez, Z. R. Z. R., Cruz-Garza, J., Tse, T., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L. J. L. (2014). Decoding of
intentional actions from scalp electroencephalography (EEG) in freely-behaving infants. 2014
36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
EMBC 2014, 2014. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944034
Kalantari, S., Contreras-Vidal, J. L., Smith, J. S., Cruz-Garza, J., & Banner, P. (2018). Evaluating
educational settings through biometric data and virtual response testing. Recalibration on
Imprecision and Infidelity - Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the Association for
Computer Aided Design in Architecture, ACADIA 2018, 118–125.
Kalantari, S. (2019, July). A new method of human response testing to enhance the design process.
In Proceedings of the Design Society: International Conference on Engineering Design (Vol. 1,
No. 1, pp. 1883-1892). Cambridge University Press.
Kalantari, S., Rounds, J. D., Julia, K., Vidushi, T., & Cruz-Garza, J. G. (2020). Immersive virtual
environments vs. Identical real-world environments: Comparing physiological responses during
cognitive tests. Scientific Reports, In press.
Kalantari, S., & Neo, J. R. J. (2020). Virtual environments for design research: lessons learned from use
of fully immersive virtual reality in interior design research. Journal of Interior Design, 45(3),
27-42.
Kaplan, S. (1995). The restorative benefits of nature: Toward an integrative framework. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 15(3), 169–182. https://doi.org/10/dxkgxh
Kidger, J., Araya, R., Donovan, J., & Gunnell, D. (2012). The effect of the school environment on the
emotional health of adolescents: A systematic review. Pediatrics.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-2248
Kim, H., Hong, T., Kim, J., & Yeom, S. (2020). A psychophysiological effect of indoor thermal condition
on college students’ learning performance through EEG measurement. Building and
Environment, 184, 107223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.107223
Kjellgren, A., & Buhrkall, H. (2010). A comparison of the restorative effect of a natural environment with
that of a simulated natural environment. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(4), 464–472.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.011
Klatte, M., Hellbrück, J., Seidel, J., & Leistner, P. (2010). Effects of Classroom Acoustics on
Performance and Well-Being in Elementary School Children: A Field Study. Environment and
Behavior, 42(5), 659–692. https://doi.org/10/bw656q
Ko, W. H., Schiavon, S., Zhang, H., Graham, L. T., Brager, G., Mauss, I., & Lin, Y.-W. (2020). The
impact of a view from a window on thermal comfort, emotion, and cognitive performance.
Building and Environment, 175, 106779. https://doi.org/10/ghnn6m
Kothe, C. (2014). Lab streaming layer (LSL). Https://Github. Com/Sccn/Labstreaminglayer. Accessed on
October.
Kothe, C. A. E., & Jung, T. P. (2016). U.S. Patent Application No. 14/895,440.

--- PAGE 25 ---
25
Küller, R., Mikellides, B., & Janssens, J. (2009). Color, arousal, and performance-A comparison of three
experiments. Color Research & Application, 34(2), 141–152. https://doi.org/10/b2n422
Li, D., & Sullivan, W. C. (2016). Impact of views to school landscapes on recovery from stress and
mental fatigue. Landscape and Urban Planning, 148, 149–158. https://doi.org/10/f8gh4d
Lotte, F., Bougrain, L., Cichocki, A., Clerc, M., Congedo, M., Rakotomamonjy, A., & Yger, F. (2018). A
review of classification algorithms for EEG-based brain–computer interfaces: A 10 year update.
Journal of Neural Engineering, 15(3), 031005. https://doi.org/10/gf48q9
Lu, M., Hu, S., Mao, Z., Liang, P., Xin, S., & Guan, H. (2020). Research on work efficiency and light
comfort based on EEG evaluation method. Building and Environment, 183, 107122.
https://doi.org/10/ghjp3z
Madden, J., Pandita, S., Schuldt, J. P., Kim, B., S. Won, A., & Holmes, N. G. (2020). Ready student one:
Exploring the predictors of student learning in virtual reality. PLOS ONE, 15(3), e0229788.
https://doi.org/10/ghnn63
Mäkinen, T. M., Palinkas, L. A., Reeves, D. L., Pääkkönen, T., Rintamäki, H., Leppäluoto, J., & Hassi, J.
(2006). Effect of repeated exposures to cold on cognitive performance in humans. Physiology &
Behavior, 87(1), 166–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.09.015
Makransky, G., Andreasen, N. K., Baceviciute, S., & Mayer, R. E. (2020). Immersive virtual reality
increases liking but not learning with a science simulation and generative learning strategies
promote learning in immersive virtual reality. Journal of Educational Psychology.
https://doi.org/10/ggrwxg
Martin, K., McLeod, E., Périard, J., Rattray, B., Keegan, R., & Pyne, D. B. (2019). The Impact of
Environmental Stress on Cognitive Performance: A Systematic Review. Human Factors, 61(8),
1205–1246. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819839817
Matsuoka, R. H. (2010). Student performance and high school landscapes: Examining the links.
Landscape and Urban Planning, 97(4), 273–282. https://doi.org/10/b7rff9
Maxwell, L. E., & Schechtman, S. L. (2012). The Role of Objective and Perceived School Building
Quality in Student Academic Outcomes and Self-Perception. Children, Youth and Environments,
22(1), 23. https://doi.org/10/ghnn68
Mendell, M. J., & Heath, G. A. (2005). Do indoor pollutants and thermal conditions in schools influence
student performance? A critical review of the literature. Indoor Air, 15(1), 27–52.
https://doi.org/10/b54r9q
Moore, G. T., Lane, C. G., Hill, A. B., Cohen, U., McGinty, T., Jules, F. A., ... & Work, L. L. (1996).
Recommendations for child care centers. Center for Architecture and Urban Planning Research,
University of Wisconsin--Milwaukee.
Morley, J., Beauchamp, G., Suyama, J., Guyette, F. X., Reis, S. E., Callaway, C. W., & Hostler, D.
(2012). Cognitive function following treadmill exercise in thermal protective clothing. European
Journal of Applied Physiology, 112(5), 1733–1740. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-011-2144-4
Nakagome, S., Craik, A., Ravindran, A., He, Y., Cruz-Garza, J. G., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L. (2020). Deep
learning methods for EEG neural classification. In N. V. Thakor (Ed.), Handbook of
Neuroengineering (1st ed., p. In press). Springer.
Nigg, J. T., Quamma, J. P., Greenberg, M. T., & Kusche, C. A. (1999). A two-year longitudinal study of
neuropsychological and cognitive performance in relation to behavioral problems and
competencies in elementary school children. Journal of abnormal child psychology, 27(1), 51-63.
Olds, A. R. (1989). Psychological and physiological harmony in child care center design.
Children's Environments Quarterly, 6(4), 8–16.
Onton, J., Westerfield, M., Townsend, J., & Makeig, S. (2006). Imaging human EEG dynamics using
independent component analysis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30(6), 808–822.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2006.06.007
Palanica, A., Lyons, A., Cooper, M., Lee, A., & Fossat, Y. (2019). A comparison of nature and urban
environments on creative thinking across different levels of reality. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 63, 44–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2019.04.006

--- PAGE 26 ---
26
Parker, S. M., Erin, J. R., Pryor, R. R., Khorana, P., Suyama, J., Guyette, F. X., Reis, S. E., & Hostler, D.
(2013). The Effect of Prolonged Light Intensity Exercise in the Heat on Executive Function.
Wilderness & Environmental Medicine, 24(3), 203–210.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wem.2013.01.010
Peng, H., Xia, C., Wang, Z., Zhu, J., Zhang, X., Sun, S., Li, J., Huo, X., & Li, X. (2019). Multivariate
Pattern Analysis of EEG-Based Functional Connectivity: A Study on the Identification of
Depression. IEEE Access, 7, 92630–92641. https://doi.org/10/ghnszt
Pion-Tonachini, L., Kreutz-Delgado, K., & Makeig, S. (2019). ICLabel: An automated
electroencephalographic independent component classifier, dataset, and website. NeuroImage,
198, 181–197. https://doi.org/10/gf22bz
Pion-Tonachini, L., Makeig, S., & Kreutz-Delgado, K. (2017). Crowd labeling latent Dirichlet allocation.
Knowledge and Information Systems, 53(3), 749–765. https://doi.org/10/gcgfmn
Porcaro, C., Zappasodi, F., Rossini, P. M., & Tecchio, F. (2009). Choice of multivariate autoregressive
model order affecting real network functional connectivity estimate. Clinical Neurophysiology,
120(2), 436–448. https://doi.org/10/cs8trp
Promethean. (2020). The State of Technology in Education Report.
https://resourced.prometheanworld.com/technology-education-industry-report
Radcliffe, D., Wilson, W., Powell, D., & Tibbetts, B. (Eds.). (2008). Learning spaces in higher education.
Positive outcomes by design. In Proceedings of the next generation learning spaces 2008
colloquium. St Lucia, QLD: The University of Queensland.
Sujatha Ravindran, A., Mobiny, A., Cruz-Garza, J. G., Paek, A., Kopteva, A., & Contreras Vidal, J. L.
(2019). Assaying neural activity of children during video game play in public spaces: A deep
learning approach. Journal of Neural Engineering, 16(3), 036028. https://doi.org/10/ghgkjn
Read, M. A., Sugawara, A. I., & Brandt, J. A. (1999). Impact of Space and Color in the Physical
Environment on Preschool Children’s Cooperative Behavior. Environment and Behavior, 31(3),
413–428. https://doi.org/10/csdzdb
Roe, J. J., Aspinall, P. A., Mavros, P., & Coyne, R. (2013). Engaging the brain: The impact of natural
versus urban scenes using novel EEG methods in an experimental setting. Environmental
Sciences, 1, 93–104. https://doi.org/10/ghnn7h
Rounds, J. D., Cruz-Garza, J. G., & Kalantari, S., (2020). Using Posterior EEG Theta Band to Assess the
Effects of Architectural Designs on Landmark Recognition in an Urban Setting. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 14, 537.
Salthouse, T. A. (2005). Relations Between Cognitive Abilities and Measures of Executive Functioning.
Neuropsychology, 19(4), 532–545. https://doi.org/10/fvvrc3
Schneider, T., & Neumaier, A. (2001). Algorithm 808: ARfit—a matlab package for the estimation of
parameters and eigenmodes of multivariate autoregressive models. ACM Transactions on
Mathematical Software, 27(1), 58–65. https://doi.org/10/bbs2xh
Sharma, G., Kaushal, Y., Chandra, S., Singh, V., Mittal, A. P., & Dutt, V. (2017). Influence of
Landmarks on Wayfinding and Brain Connectivity in Immersive Virtual Reality Environment.
Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 1220. https://doi.org/10/gbqh82
Shin, Y.-B., Woo, S.-H., Kim, D.-H., Kim, J., Kim, J.-J., & Park, J. Y. (2015). The effect on emotions
and brain activity by the direct/indirect lighting in the residential environment. Neuroscience
Letters, 584, 28–32. https://doi.org/10/f6wqrt
Sivan, A. B. (1992). Benton visual retention test. Psychological Corporation San Antonio, TX.
Spitznagel, M. B., Updegraff, J., Pierce, K., Walter, K. H., Collinsworth, T., Glickman, E., & Gunstad, J.
(2009). Cognitive Function During Acute Cold Exposure With or Without Sleep Deprivation
Lasting 53 Hours. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 80(8), 703–708.
https://doi.org/10.3357/asem.2507.2009
Spreng, R. N., Sepulcre, J., Turner, G. R., Stevens, W. D., & Schacter, D. L. (2013). Intrinsic Architecture
Underlying the Relations among the Default, Dorsal Attention, and Frontoparietal Control

--- PAGE 27 ---
27
Networks of the Human Brain. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25(1), 74–86.
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00281
Staudigl, T., & Hanslmayr, S. (2019). Reactivation of neural patterns during memory reinstatement
supports encoding specificity. Cognitive Neuroscience, 10(4), 175–185.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2019.1621825
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 18(6), 643–662. https://doi.org/10/b77m95
Sundstrom, E. (1975). An experimental study of crowding: Effects of room size, intrusion, and goal
blocking on nonverbal behavior, self-disclosure, and self-reported stress. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 32(4), 645–654. https://doi.org/10/c67mps
Taylor, L., Fitch, N., Castle, P., Watkins, S., Aldous, J., Sculthorpe, N., Midgely, A., Brewer, J., &
Mauger, A. (2014). Exposure to hot and cold environmental conditions does not affect the
decision making ability of soccer referees following an intermittent sprint protocol. Frontiers in
Physiology, 5. https://doi.org/10/ghm43k
Tennessen, C. M., & Cimprich, B. (1995). Views to nature: Effects on attention. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 15(1), 77–85. https://doi.org/10/fgzxbm
Thomson, D. J. (1982). Spectrum estimation and harmonic analysis. Proceedings of the IEEE, 70(9),
1055–1096. https://doi.org/10/fcfqm4
Townsend, J. T., & Ashby, F. G. (1978). Methods of modeling capacity in simple processing
systems. Cognitive theory, 3, 199-139.
Ulrich, R. S. (2006). Essay: Evidence-based health-care architecture. The Lancet, 368, S38–S39.
https://doi.org/10/dgj5gt
Ulrich, R. S., Simons, R. F., Losito, B. D., Fiorito, E., Miles, M. A., & Zelson, M. (1991). Stress recovery
during exposure to natural and urban environments. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 11(3),
201–230. https://doi.org/10/csp47k
Vandierendonck, A. (2017). A comparison of methods to combine speed and accuracy measures of
performance: A rejoinder on the binning procedure. Behavior Research Methods, 49(2), 653–673.
https://doi.org/10/f96whp
Vartanian, O., Navarrete, G., Chatterjee, A., Fich, L. B., Gonzalez-Mora, J. L., Leder, H., Modroño, C.,
Nadal, M., Rostrup, N., & Skov, M. (2015). Architectural design and the brain: Effects of ceiling
height and perceived enclosure on beauty judgments and approach-avoidance decisions. Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 41, 10–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.11.006
Vartanian, O., Navarrete, G., Chatterjee, A., Fich, L. B., Leder, H., Modrono, C., Nadal, M., Rostrup, N.,
& Skov, M. (2013). Impact of contour on aesthetic judgments and approach-avoidance decisions
in architecture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(Supplement_2), 10446–
10453. https://doi.org/10/swv
Vecchiato, G., Tieri, G., Jelic, A., De Matteis, F., Maglione, A. G., & Babiloni, F. (2015).
Electroencephalographic Correlates of Sensorimotor Integration and Embodiment during the
Appreciation of Virtual Architectural Environments. Frontiers in Psychology, 6.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01944
Vogelsang, D. A., Gruber, M., Bergström, Z. M., Ranganath, C., & Simons, J. S. (2018). Alpha
Oscillations during Incidental Encoding Predict Subsequent Memory for New “Foil” Information.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 30(5), 667–679. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01234
Wannarka, R., & Ruhl, K. (2008). Seating arrangements that promote positive academic and behavioural
outcomes: A review of empirical research. Support for Learning, 23(2), 89–93.
https://doi.org/10/bsg596
Wargocki, P. (2019). Productivity and Health Effects of High Indoor Air Quality. In Encyclopedia of
Environmental Health (pp. 382–388). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409548-
9.01993-X

--- PAGE 28 ---
28
Wargocki, P., & Wyon, D. (2007). The Effects of Moderately Raised Classroom Temperatures and
Classroom Ventilation Rate on the Performance of Schoolwork by Children (RP-1257).
HVAC&R Research, 13(2), 193–220. https://doi.org/10/dg9gb4
Wechsler, D. (1981). Manual for the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale—Revised. In Psychological
Corporation.
Winchip, S. (1991). Factors Contributing to a Safe, Supportive and Desirable Housing Environment for
Children. Housing and Society, 18(3), 23–29. https://doi.org/10/ghnn8w
Winterbottom, M., & Wilkins, A. (2009). Lighting and discomfort in the classroom. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 29(1), 63–75. https://doi.org/10/bbsnkh
Yin, J., Yuan, J., Arfaei, N., Catalano, P. J., Allen, J. G., & Spengler, J. D. (2020). Effects of biophilic
indoor environment on stress and anxiety recovery: A between-subjects experiment in virtual
reality. Environment International, 136, 105427. https://doi.org/10/ggmddb
Yin, J., Zhu, S., MacNaughton, P., Allen, J. G., & Spengler, J. D. (2018). Physiological and cognitive
performance of exposure to biophilic indoor environment. Building and Environment, 132, 255–
262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.01.006
Zhang, F., de Dear, R., & Hancock, P. (2019). Effects of moderate thermal environments on cognitive
performance: A multidisciplinary review. Applied Energy, 236, 760–777.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.12.005
Zhou, H., Xiong, G.-J., Jing, L., Song, N.-N., Pu, D.-L., Tang, X., He, X.-B., Xu, F.-Q., Huang, J.-F., Li,
L.-J., Richter-Levin, G., Mao, R.-R., Zhou, Q.-X., Ding, Y.-Q., & Xu, L. (2017). The
interhemispheric CA1 circuit governs rapid generalisation but not fear memory. Nature
Communications, 8(1), 2190. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02315-4
Zhu, M., Liu, W. & Wargocki, P. (2020) Changes in EEG signals during the cognitive activity at varying
air temperature and relative humidity. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol, 30, 285–298
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-019-0154-1
Zimring, C., Joseph, A., & Choudhary, R. (2004). The role of the physical environment in the
hospital of the 21st century: A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Concord, CA: The Center
for Health Design, 311.
Zumer, J. M., Scheeringa, R., Schoffelen, J.-M., Norris, D. G., & Jensen, O. (2014). Occipital Alpha
Activity during Stimulus Processing Gates the Information Flow to Object-Selective Cortex.
PLoS Biology, 12(10). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001965

--- PAGE 29 ---
29
Supplementary Materials Figure 1. Classification accuracy between design conditions. To assess the
validity of our results, we calculated chance levels by scrambling the time-window index that identifies
the room the participants were in. * p < 0.003, ** p < 0.0006 (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 Bonferroni-corrected
for 15 comparisons) . The shaded areas indicate the interquartile range in classification accuracy. The
vertical line is located at 180 features, for which most of the significant results were found among the
comparisons.