Does sketch map test 1 instructions ('important features') affect average number of nodes in sketch map? What is the evidence?
Does shape (curved/angular) affect preference rating (simple shapes)? What is the evidence?
Does light spectral power distribution affect nocturnal melatonin suppression? What is the evidence?
Does gradient of density of the texture of a projected image (corresponding to physic affect judged slant of the perceived surface? What is the evidence?
Does strong subjective discomfort affect thermal pleasure? What is the evidence?
Does visual discrimination difficulty (medium, set i) affect rapidity of habit-formation (tests to criterion)? What is the evidence?
Does electric stimulus strength (125 units, set i, medium discrimination) affect rapidity of habit-formation (tests to criterion)? What is the evidence?
Does electric stimulus strength (300 units, set i, medium discrimination) affect rapidity of habit-formation (tests to criterion)? What is the evidence?
Does electric stimulus strength (500 units, set i, medium discrimination) affect rapidity of habit-formation (tests to criterion)? What is the evidence?
Does electric stimulus strength (135 units, set ii, easy discrimination) affect rapidity of habit-formation (tests to criterion)? What is the evidence?
Does electric stimulus strength (420 units, set ii, easy discrimination) affect rapidity of habit-formation (tests to criterion)? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (30 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (30 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (40 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (40 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (50 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (50 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (60 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (60 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does adhan sound pressure level (70 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does seeing the image of the shabistan of the nasir al-mulk mosque (vr) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does seeing the image of the shabistan of the nasir al-mulk mosque (vr) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (30 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (30 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (40 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (40 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (50 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (50 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (60 db) affect alpha brain waves? What is the evidence?
Does seeing mosque image (vr) + adhan sound pressure level (60 db) affect theta/beta ratio? What is the evidence?
